Canada has a peculiar problem. We're
exceptionally good at creating
worldchanging AI research and
exceptionally bad at keeping the
economic benefits of that research.
We're like a high-end talent factory
with a massive export problem. But
here's the twist. Recent geopolitical
shifts might have just handed us an
unexpected opportunity to flip the
script. Welcome to episode 4 of my
series AI Hype Versus Reality, where I
dissect actual facts from noise. And
today we're looking at Canada's AI brain
drain. Is it as bad as the headlines
suggest or are we missing something
important? Case in point. Let's start
with what Canada gets right. And trust
me, there is a lot. Canada is undeniably
a powerhouse in AI research. Often
ranking in the top three to four
countries for AI research and academic
achievements in 2025. Canada has had
major breakthroughs in AI, worldclass
talent and noteworthy applications
across multiple sectors. back
propagation algorithm and later word
embeddings developed by Jeffrey Hinton
are really the core reason we're able to
use LLMs like GBT, Claude, Gemini or
Llama today. Canada also takes pride in
some notable achievements in AI
architectures. Time delay neural
networks that recognize patterns in
sequence data especially in audio or
speech. Boltzman machines also
co-invented by Jeffrey Hinton that learn
to represent and generate patterns which
is the foundation for unsupervised
learning and later deep generated
models. University of Toronto
researchers, including Aiden Gomez,
co-authored the influential 2017 paper
on transformer network architecture. In
case you haven't heard about it, this is
one of the most important scientific
papers of the decade. Anyone who works
with machine learning will tell you how
fundamental transformers have become to
today's machine learning. Richard Sutton
at the University of Alberta developed
core algorithms in model reinforcement
learning. His textbook became a standard
reference for researchers across the
world. AlexNet from 2012 developed by
Jeffrey Hinton, Alex Kvski and Ilasgiver
at uft was the first deep convolutional
neural network that achieved dramatic
advances in image recognition which
marked a pivotal moment in the deep
learning revolution. The practical AI
applications are impressive too. AI
powered wildfire prediction, affordable
AI prosthetics like smart arm and
worldclass research hubs like the Vector
Institute in Toronto, Mila in Montreal
and Alberta Machine intelligence
institute in Edmonton. I spoke about
this in my very first video about Canada
and I would like to highlight it again.
Canada has a very strong academic and
intellectual potential. I think that
Canada doesn't have a very strong
marketing as a country, but it's like
that one quiet nerdy kid sitting at the
very back who knows answers to every
single question. Now, how has public and
academic funding shaped the type of AI
research conducted in Canada? Canada is
known for fundamental and academic AI
research. This is important. Not
commercialization that brings us a ton
of money, but academic research. In
2017, Canada launched the panadian AI
strategy that prioritizes academic
research by supporting renowned
institutes such as Mila in Montreal,
Vector Institute in Toronto, and Alberta
Machine Intelligence. This was the first
program of its kind globally, which
expanded in the recent years, investing
over $2 billion since inception. This
was followed by an additional $2.4 4
billion commitment in 2024. Here's the
thing. Canada has the privilege of being
able to afford curiositydriven research.
Research driven by questions about
foundational principles and hypothetical
possibilities rather than immediate
market or industry needs. Now, why do I
call it a privilege? Because for many
folks working in academia, the ability
to work on things that they read in
sci-fi books about is a dream come true.
Not every country can afford to give
that possibility and opportunity to
scientists. Canadian scientists work on
long-term foundational AI problems,
foundational algorithms, mathematical
proofs, studying properties of learning
systems, often without a specific
commercial strategy in mind. The
majority of public funding through
federal agencies has historically gone
to basic research, student training, and
professional research chairs. Sounds
pretty great, right? Well, here's where
things get interesting. There is one
fundamental problem with this type of AI
specialization. This research doesn't
fully translate into opportunities and
money to the extent that it needs to.
Don't get me wrong, I'm not making
sweeping generalizations. Things are
happening, but there is a glaring gap
between Canada's exceptional potential
as an AI research leader and the scale
of its domestic and most importantly
international commercialization,
particularly compared to the United
States. Let's understand why. Canada's
inability to fully translate world-class
AI research into largecale commercial
success isn't a single failing. It's a
tangle of structural, cultural, and
historic problems. Here's some
historical context. Canadian tech and AI
research have been deeply rooted in
academia since the post-war era.
Canadian governments poured resources
into universities and fundamental
research, and they did create
world-class research hubs, but not
equally robust pathways to market. This
fostered a culture where research
excellence and publications were
prioritized over building products or
companies. Technology transfer
processes, moving innovation from lab to
market, were slow, bureaucratic, and
often dep prioritized. Canadian
universities develop technology transfer
offices decades after the US peers and
are frequently described as ill adapted
to quick pivots necessary to take an
idea from market to scale it. Unlike the
US where major government contracts
provide vital runway for new cutting
edge ideas. Think SpaceX or Palunteer.
Imagine SpaceX without NASA. Exactly.
Canadian governments are less likely to
serve as anchor customers for early
stage innovation companies. On top of
that, Canada faces a smaller domestic
market and startups often relocate or
sell early to access the US buyers as
well as their venture capitals and
customer bases. Now, I'd like to add a
few things here as I personally don't
think that the size of the domestic
market is a very good excuse. Sure,
Canada has a small domestic market. So
does Switzerland. So does Sweden and so
does Israel. Switzerland dominates
Europe in semiconductor and chip
production. Sweden pumps out unicorns
that scale globally. And Israel produces
insane cyber security products that
dominate the US market. Canada can make
domestically and export technology. We
can make patents and sell to others. we
can find niches to take over and fully
dominate as a market leader. But
commercialization is not our forte. And
what this leads to is intellectual
property leakage because most successful
Canadian companies get quickly acquired
or headquartered elsewhere. Canadian
leaders are generally riskaverse. Many
Canadian firms are slow to see AI as
relevant to their operations which leads
to minimal experimentation and pilot
project. If you're surprised, trust me,
you're not alone. So was I. But when I
was doing the research for this video, I
found a bunch of resources published by
Canadian authors. And surprisingly, yes,
we are slow in AI adoption compared to
other tier one tech markets. I am
personally very lucky in that regard
because I work at a company that hugely
embraces AI adoption, which is amazing.
And I'm thankful for the fact that my
own workplace keeps everybody on their
toes. Maybe that's why I make videos
about debunking myths that AI is going
to replace us all. Because when you
truly understand how it works, it
becomes pretty evident that it won't
happen. But outside the bubble that I'm
in, the AI adoption in Canada is slow.
Now, I would like to pause here and
bring your attention to the intellectual
property or IP crisis because it's
really important. Why is intellectual
property so important in the context of
commercialization? It's important
because it determines who ultimately
controls, profits from, and builds on
major AI inventions. Let me hit you with
some sobering numbers. The intellectual
property and startup acquisition crisis
is more serious than ever. About 75% of
patents produced by researchers at
Canada's top AI institutes now belong to
foreign multinational giants like Uber
and Nvidia. Only 7% fully remain in
Canada. Let that sink in. Only 7%. We're
not just losing intellectual property.
We're losing our economic future. Major
AI advances like new models, algorithms,
and methods can underpin entire new
industries or billion-dollar companies.
If intellectual property developed here
is commercialized elsewhere, the biggest
gains acrew to other countries, not us.
Let's talk about why we're losing
intellectual property. Lack of
commercialization infrastructure.
Federal incentives often support
research or early pilots, but not the
messy middle. integration, ongoing
costs, training and scaling projects is
often dep prioritized past V1. Projects
frequently die after the pilot phase due
to this budget cliff. Insufficient
domestic funds, lack of hands-on
capital, and large investors willing to
commit the resources needed through the
full commercialization and the valley of
death. Access to scale capital. Many
Canadian ventures reach a ceiling in
local VC and must look to US funds or
buyers for 100 million plus rounds
needed to compete globally. Insufficient
AI compute. Canada has lagged in scaling
up public and sovereign AI compute
infrastructure. A critical component for
modern AI R&D and commercialization. The
lack of domestic supercomputing forced
many startups and researchers to seek
resources abroad, often relocating
entirely. Are there specific examples of
Canadian AI research breakthroughs that
failed to commercialize in Canada but
succeeded elsewhere? Yes. Scent ML,
Toronto-based AI optimization innovator
acquired by Nvidia for over $400
million. Nvidia's gain Canada's brain
drain. Tantorrrent raised nearly $700
million then relocated its headquarters
from Toronto to Santa Clara to tap into
bigger US markets. Tentor's move
exemplifies a relocation for scaling
dynamic. Element AI $250 million in
funding sold to US-based Service Now.
This acquisition was viewed as a loss
for Canadian tech sovereignty. It
highlighted challenges in scaling
complex AI ventures domestically without
foreign support or buyouts. Maluba
acquired by Microsoft shows a recurring
pattern. Global tech companies acquire
Canadian breakthroughs to power their
own R&D rather than fostering Canadian
corporate champions or retaining the
full cycle of innovation domestically.
Notice a pattern. We're very good at
creating worldclass AI ventures. We're
just not very good at keeping them. Now,
let's talk about the talent drained by
the numbers. Recent Statistics Canada
data revealed that about 86% of
mathematics and computer science
graduates were still in Canada 3 years
after graduating. This means that
roughly 14% left within 3 years. The
retention drops further at the PhD
level. Only 83% of Canadian doctoral
graduates remain in Canada 3 years
postgraduation, implying that about 17%
of new PhDs across all STEM fields left
for opportunities abroad. This higher
doctorate outflow suggests that the more
highly trained the individual, the more
likely they are to seek employment
outside of Canada. Canada's presence
among the world's elite AI researchers
has declined significantly. In 2019,
Canada was home to about 10% of the
world's most elite AI researchers. By
2022, that share dropped to 3%. The most
elite in this context refers to the top
AI research scientists, for example,
those selected for most prestigious
conference presentations. Similarly,
Canada's share of top tier AI
researchers, a slightly broader group
working in country fell from 6% to 2% in
2022. Many leading AI experts who have
Canadian ties by training or origin are
now working and building fantastic
companies elsewhere. The United States
is by far the top destination. About 17%
of Canadian PhD graduates were working
in the US a few years after graduation
with 8% in other countries. This
suggests that twothirds of all Canadian
PhD holders abroad are in the US. In
summary, when it comes to Brain Drain,
we're very focused customers. We don't
spread our talent around. We ship it
directly to the Silicon Valley, American
companies, and American universities.
Now, why do they leave? The primary
driver is money and resources. Canadian
AI Institute leaders note cases of
astronomical offers. Seven figure salary
offers straight out of graduation
offered by some American firms. Seven
figures straight out of graduation. Fang
companies can offer compensation
packages seldom matched in Canada.
Beyond salary, these companies provide
massive research budgets, state-of-art
computing infrastructure, and projects
with global impact, which is very
important for scientists, often times
more important than the salary itself.
In short, talent gravitates to where the
money and cutting edge opportunities
are, often Silicon Valley or other major
US AI labs. A number of students
mentored by Canada's godfathers of AI
like Jeffrey Hinton and Joshua Benjio
moved to the US after graduating. Now,
why is Canada able to build but not
sell? Policy makers have framed the risk
simply. Canada could end up mainly
importing AI solutions instead of
exporting them. When Canadian trained
talent builds careers at foreign firms,
the intellectual property, patents, and
AI platforms they create usually reside
outside of Canada. Canada's AI pioneers
have expressed that the country must
strive to be a producer, not just a
consumer of AI innovation. We have a
rare opportunity to make a very a very
expensive domestic product, a pipeline
of expensive products, and start pumping
them out the way China pumps out pretty
much anything from plastic to cars. A
continued brain drain undermines this
goal. For example, if a breakthrough in
AI healthcare is made by Canadian
researchers, but under a US company,
Canada may have to buy or license that
technology back. Over time, this dynamic
could put Canada at a competitive
disadvantage in terms of tax sovereignty
and economic returns from the AI sector.
And now, plot twist.
Trump's unexpected gift. Trump's
administration and new policies
beginning in 2025 have directly affected
Canada's AI brain drain in the opposite
direction from what many might expect.
Instead of worsening Canadian talent
outflows, recent US policies have
created an opportunity for Canada to
reverse some of its historic brain
drain, especially among highly skilled
AI researchers, academics, and STEM
professionals. Now, how have the US
administration policies changed?
significant cuts to federal funding for
US research, new restrictions on grant
criteria, more politicized intervention
in higher education, promises to shorten
visa durations, and limited pathways
like H-1B, OPT, and STEM OPT. And let's
be honest, the reason the Silicon Valley
has become the Silicon Valley that we
know it is because of H1B. And by the
way, to be clear, I'm neither condoning
nor condemning this. I simply treat this
as a data point in my research and
stating what happened. So, please don't
get into whose side are you on. The
official AI action plan released in July
2025 by the Trump administration makes
no mention of immigration or the
attraction of foreignb born talent and
instead focuses on domestic regulation
and federal procurement. How does this
affect Canada? Canadian universities and
research institutes have reported
increased numbers of US professors,
researchers, and international students
seeking to relocate to Canada. Multiple
reports refer to this as a golden chance
for Canada to reverse its brain drain as
highly skilled people leave a newly
restrictive US for more stable and
researchfriendly environments. Now,
there is a very slim chance of this
video making it to Mr. Carney's
administration. But if you do happen to
see this video, Mr. Carney, please don't
f this up. This is our chance and it's
not going to last forever. Conclusion.
So, is Canada's AI brain drain real? The
answer is nuanced. The numbers don't
lie. We've gone from 10% to 3% of the
world's elite AI researchers in just
three years. Our best companies get
acquired, our best graduates get
poached, and our best innovators get
commercialized elsewhere. But, and this
is important, the tide might be turning.
Canada's fundamental strengths remain
intact. Worldclass research, significant
government investment, ethical AI
leadership, and now unexpectedly or
expectedly, a geopolitical advantage.
The brain drain was real. The question
now is whether we can capitalize on this
moment to reverse it. And that's it for
this episode of AI Hype versus Reality.
Would love to hear what you guys think.
Are we witnessing a reversal of Canada's
AI brain drain or just a temporary blip?
Let me know in the comments and I'll see
you in the next episode. As always, I
hope this was helpful. Till next time.
Bye.